content/pages/privacy/index.md, before:

+++
title = "Privacy Policy"
path = "privacy"
date = 2023-10-28

[extra]
isso = false
+++

This privacy policy outlines how I collect and process your data on this website.

{{ toc() }}

## What data do I collect?

### General browsing {#what-general}

While browsing the site, no personal information is collected. IP addresses are not stored in any way in the server logs.

### Comments {#what-comments}

If you submit a comment, the following data is collected:

- IP address
- Name (optional)
- E-mail address (optional)
- Website (optional)

### Analytics {#what-analytics}

For website improvement, the following non-personal data is collected:

- **Referrer**: the source that led you to this site.
- **Requested URL**: the specific page you visited.
- **User-Agent**: identifies the browser and operating system you use (e.g. "Safari 17.0, Mac OS X").
- **Country name**: the country you are visiting from, determined by your IP address.
- **Language**: the language your browser is set to.
- **Screen size**: the dimensions of your device's screen.
- **Time**: when you accessed the site.

I do not track unique visitors, and I do not track how long you stay on the site or where you go after you leave.

## How do I collect this data?

### Comments {#how-comments}

The personal data (IP, name, e-mail, website) is collected using a self-hosted instance of [Isso](https://isso-comments.de/), an open-source commenting platform.

### Analytics {#how-analytics}

The non-personal data is collected using a self-hosted instance of [GoatCounter](https://www.goatcounter.com/), an open-source privacy-friendly web analytics platform.

## How will I use the data?

The optional personal data is used to display your comment on the site. The IP address is used to prevent spam and abuse.

The non personal data is used to generate statistics about the site, such as the number of visitors per day, or the most popular pages and referrers. This data is used to improve the site. You can see the statistics generated from this data on the [public stats page](https://stats.osc.garden/).

All data collected is publically available on the site, either in the form of comments or statistics.

I am not using the data for any other purpose.

## How do I store the data?

The data is stored on a server hosted by [Oracle Cloud](https://cloud.oracle.com/). The server is located in Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The server follows industry best practices for security, including automatic security updates, a strict Content Security Policy, a firewall, key-based SSH access, etc.

## How long will I store the data?

The IP address is stored until the comment is moderated. After that, the IP address is deleted.

The rest of the data is stored indefinitely.

## What are your data protection rights?

Depending on the processing and the legal basis, there are a number of possibilities available to you to keep control over your personal data:

- Right to access your data
- Right to amend your data
- Right to object to the processing of your personal data
- Right to limit the processing of your data
- Right to have your data deleted
- Right to withdraw your consent

If you make a request, I have one month to respond to you. If you would like to exercise any of these rights, please contact me using the e-mail icon in the footer of the site.

## Cookies

The site does not use cookies.

## Privacy policies of other websites

This website contains links to other websites. My privacy policy applies only to this website, so if you click on a link to another website, you should read their privacy policy.

## Changes to the privacy policy

I keep this privacy policy under regular review and place any updates on this web page. This privacy policy was last updated on 2023-10-28.

## How to contact me

If you have any questions about this privacy policy, the data I hold on you, or you would like to exercise one of your data protection rights, please do not hesitate to contact me using the e-mail icon in the footer of the site.

Commit message:

update privacy policy to mention sessions
GoatCounter is broken if sessions aren't enabled.
See: arp242/goatcounter#704

content/pages/privacy/index.md, after:

+++
title = "Privacy Policy"
path = "privacy"
date = 2023-10-28
updated = 2023-11-07

[extra]
isso = false
+++

This privacy policy outlines how I collect and process your data on this website.

{{ toc() }}

## What data do I collect?

### General browsing {#what-general}

While browsing the site, no personal information is collected. IP addresses are not stored in any way in the server logs.

### Comments {#what-comments}

If you submit a comment, the following data is collected:

- IP address
- Name (optional)
- E-mail address (optional)
- Website (optional)

### Analytics {#what-analytics}

For website improvement, the following non-personal data is collected:

- **Referrer**: the source that led you to this site.
- **Requested URL**: the specific page you visited.
- **User-Agent**: identifies the browser and operating system you use (e.g. "Safari 17.0, Mac OS X").
- **Country name**: the country you are visiting from, determined by your IP address.
- **Language**: the language your browser is set to.
- **Screen size**: the dimensions of your device's screen.
- **Time**: when you accessed the site.
- **Browsing session**: a temporary identification code generated from your IP address, browser information, and a random number. This is used to recognise a browsing session for 8 hours. After that time, the code is deleted from memory and is not stored anywhere.

I do not track unique visitors across sessions, and I do not track how long you stay on the site or where you go after you leave.

## How do I collect this data?

### Comments {#how-comments}

The personal data (IP, name, e-mail, website) is collected using a self-hosted instance of [Isso](https://isso-comments.de/), an open-source commenting platform.

### Analytics {#how-analytics}

The non-personal data is collected using a self-hosted instance of [GoatCounter](https://www.goatcounter.com/), an open-source privacy-friendly web analytics platform.

## How will I use the data?

The optional personal data is used to display your comment on the site. The IP address is used to prevent spam and abuse.

The non personal data is used to generate statistics about the site, such as the number of visitors per day, or the most popular pages and referrers. This data is used to improve the site. You can see the statistics generated from this data on the [public stats page](https://stats.osc.garden/).

All data collected is publicly available on the site, either in the form of comments or statistics.

I am not using the data for any other purpose.

## How do I store the data?

The data is stored on a server hosted by [Oracle Cloud](https://cloud.oracle.com/). The server is located in Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The server follows industry best practices for security, including automatic security updates, a strict Content Security Policy, a firewall, key-based SSH access, etc.

## How long will I store the data?

The IP address is stored until the comment is moderated. After that, the IP address is deleted.

The rest of the data is stored indefinitely.

## What are your data protection rights?

Depending on the processing and the legal basis, there are a number of possibilities available to you to keep control over your personal data:

- Right to access your data
- Right to amend your data
- Right to object to the processing of your personal data
- Right to limit the processing of your data
- Right to have your data deleted
- Right to withdraw your consent

If you make a request, I have one month to respond to you. If you would like to exercise any of these rights, please contact me using the e-mail icon in the footer of the site.

## Cookies

The site does not use cookies.

## Privacy policies of other websites

This website contains links to other websites. My privacy policy applies only to this website, so if you click on a link to another website, you should read their privacy policy.

## Changes to the privacy policy

I keep this privacy policy under regular review and place any updates on this web page. You can check the date this privacy policy was updated, as well as the history of changes under the page title.

## How to contact me

If you have any questions about this privacy policy, the data I hold on you, or you would like to exercise one of your data protection rights, please do not hesitate to contact me using the e-mail icon in the footer of the site.
